# What The OpenCollar Name Stands For

At the end of October 2017, Wendy Starfall sent a notice to the OpenCollar group
announcing her retirement from the project.  Upon seeing that, Athaliah Opus and
I started talking about how to keep the project true to its founding values.
Then we saw notices from VirtualDisgrace calling Garvin Twine the project lead.
That raised further concerns.  I tried contacting VirtualDisgrace to talk about
our concerns, and offered friendship so we could catch each other online. I
received no response to these inquiries.  The recent ownership changes in the
group have flowed from these events.  

As founders of the OpenCollar project, we (Athy and Nandana) both feel that now
is an important time to reiterate the project's commitment to its founding
values of openness and community. Though Wendy's return a few days ago makes the
situation more muddled, it does not change our commitment to keeping OpenCollar
open and free, including not favoring one merchant over another.  In this
notecard we will review some history of the project, outline a few areas where
the project was straying from its founding values, and briefly talk about the
future.

## Starting OpenCollar

OpenCollar was started as an experiment.  In 2008 the dominant collar brands
were Amethyst, Master & Slave (M&S), and Dari's.  All were closed, commercial
systems, and one of them (M&S) was very expensive.  I (Nandana) personally used
an Amethyst collar, but I was unsatisfied with being unable to wear different
collars with different outfits, while keeping the settings between them in sync
(especially ownership settings).  I tried writing a plugin that would save my
Amethyst settings to Google App Engine and then sync from there when I changed
collars, but found that Amethyst's plugin system did not provide the access I
needed to make that work.  So I decided to write my own set of collar scripts,
and OpenCollar was born.

Athaliah was already a good friend of mine at that time, and I quickly enlisted
her help.  Decisions about the project were made by consensus between us.  She
created the OpenCollar group, set up an inworld location,  handled project
finances, and managed QA testing and releases of new versions.  I continued
scripting, designed collars, wrote documentation, built the original "Temple of
the Collar", and recruited other scripters and designers to contribute to the
project.  Of all the things we did at the time, one simple one stands out as
most important: rather than starting a competing for-profit venture, we made
OpenCollar free and open source.  That altruism and openness led to a rapid
explosion of interest from both users and contributors.

## Gratitude

Fairly early on we started hearing from users who treated us and other
contributors as though we owed them technical support, specific bug fixes, and
new features.  We used group notices and chats to counter this attitude,
establishing an ethos that I would summarize as "Gratitude, not Entitlement".
We should all be grateful for the contributions that many people have made to
the project, and we should resist the temptation to act as though we're entitled
to them giving us more of their time, talent, or other resources.  Though I risk
accidentally leaving out some important contributors, I'd like to list those I
remember who have given important contributions.  In very rough order of
appearance:

- Nandana Singh (now Nirea Resident)
- Athaliah Opus
- Lulu Pink
- Doggy Core
- Alice Callaghan
- Khiara Kanto
- Summer Seale
- Velveteen Scribe
- Jayne Giano
- Lecina Enigma
- Eiko Zeffirelli
- Anika Mureaux
- Quitero Klaar
- Andria Babenco
- Ivald Huldasson
- Jenniferz Vita
- Cleo Collins
- Asami Imako
- Satomi Ahn
- Sei Lisa
- Wendy Starfall
- Master Starship
- Romka Swallowtail
- Garvin Twine (aka Otto)
- Silkie Sabra
- littlemousy
- Medea Destiny
- Sumi Perl
- Ray Zopf
- Toy Wylie
- Joy Stipe
- Kyrah Abattoir
- VirtualDisgrace
- Grey Mars

(If you have contributed to the project and I left you out, please let me know!
You deserve our gratitude.)

Wendy has probably given more to OpenCollar than anyone, and for that we should
all be extremely grateful.  But contributing time to the project does not
entitle anyone to ownership of it.  OpenCollar remains about being free, open,
and community-driven.  It is not about any one person, whether that's myself,
Wendy, Athy, or anyone.

## Community

We want to welcome and support new users.  In the past couple years, however,
there have been times when those moderating the group have been insulting to
users in group chat.  This is not OK, even if the person is acting entitled.
Troublemakers may be kicked or banned, but no one should be insulted or
attacked.  Doing so runs counter to OpenCollar's goal of creating a welcoming
community for new users.

## Openness and Fairness

Guiding principle 1: OpenCollar is a labor of love, given freely to the Second
Life community.  While any designer is free to make a collar and put OpenCollar
scripts in it, the project itself is nonprofit, and will not favor one designer
over another.

Guiding principle 2: People contributing money should know where it's going.

At one point we had our main inworld location organized around separate
contributors, with a list of each person's contributions to the project, and a
personal tip board for each contributor.  Whenever we had a generic tip board
for the overall OpenCollar project, the funds it collected were dedicated to
project expenses like tier and web hosting fees.

In the time before Wendy started maintaining the project, Athy and I saw a
number of people try to subvert its commitment to openness for their own profit.
Some of these were outside creators with far-fetched ideas, while others were
insiders who saw an opportunity to use the OpenCollar name to promote their
products in ways not available to their competitors.  When I removed the
web-based settings database, for example, one developer tried to make his
for-profit replacement the preferred alternative.  We shut that down.  Another
time we had a team member providing group/land management bots who tried to use
his position to take over the group.  We shut that down too.  OpenCollar's
well-known name and large inworld group are tempting targets to people who want
an advantage in marketing their for-profit products.

Everyone has RL obligations, and Athy and I are no exception.  We reduced our
online time as career and family obligations increased, and Wendy very
generously helped to fill the void, first with tasks focused on the community
and handling releases, and later with changes to the code.

I eventually proposed a structure where Wendy would act as a CEO, while I and
perhaps others served as a board of directors with say over major decisions.
That arrangement was followed for a while between Wendy and I, but decayed over
time.  As part of that CEO+Board structure, I created an account named
OpenCollar Organiser to hold project funds and the full perms versions of
designs, and shared the login credentials with Wendy.

When Wendy first talked to me about partnering with VirtualDisgrace (VD), I
expressed my concerns over a potential conflict of interest between the ideals
of the project and the for-profit nature of VD.  Wendy reassured me that the two
would remain strictly separate.  As I saw how things played out, however, some
concerns remained.  It seemed to me that VirtualDisgrace products were being
promoted to OpenCollar group members in a way that was not available to other
collar makers in SL.  This felt to me like a departure from the more even-handed
practices of the past, and OpenCollar's commitment to be open and fair.  Both
Athy and I have been concerned that some things that should be free (like the
spy plugin, updaters/transmuters, and tools for installing OC into your own
products) were instead being sold for money and promoted in the OpenCollar
group.

In July 2016 I tried to log in to the OpenCollar Organiser account to check up
on how finances were being distributed.  I found that the password for
OpenCollar Organiser had been changed and I had been locked out of the account.
This was concerning.  Imagine the feeling of coming home from vacation and
seeing that your housesitter had locked you out of your own house and changed
the locks.  Without a view into the account's transactions, I had no way of
ensuring that funds were still going to the project's stated mission.  I asked
Wendy about this, and she mysteriously told me to talk to Otto/Garvin
Twine.  After some more discussion,  she walked me through the systems then in
use for distributing funds.  I was satisfied that she was doing so honestly,
with one exception.  I saw that 50% of all tips to the "OpenCollar" tip boards
at the temple were being paid to a single developer, Otto.  This was very
concerning.  I was not comfortable with people thinking they were donating to
tier and server costs but really having it go to an individual.

In more recent months, tips have stopped going to OpenCollar Organiser.  It's my
understanding that they now go through VirtualDisgrace, though I'm not 100%
sure.

## The Future

With the removal of Wendy, Otto, and VirtualDisgrace as OpenCollar group owners,
we are returning to a clean separation between the OpenCollar open source
project and all for-money products.  All merchants are free to use OpenCollar
scripts in their products.  No merchant gets special treatment, such as
exclusive access to promote their products in the OpenCollar group.  Someone in
group chat today made the analogy of OpenCollar being like Linux, and
VirtualDisgrace being a distributor like RedHat.  I think that's a good analogy,
and I look forward to a world where there are many such distributors.  But just
as the Linux Foundation wouldn't choose a single distributor for preferential
treatment, neither will OpenCollar choose a single merchant for preferential
treatment.  While anyone is free to clone or even fork OpenCollar's open source
code, only myself and Athaliah are authorized to designate official OpenCollar
releases and locations.

In the upcoming months I will be working on filling some of the gaps discussed
above.  The first release will be an invisible object containing the collar
scripts, that you can attach in addition to whatever visual collar design you
like.  Later on, we'll release either a simplified OpenCollar version 7 or new
free tools to make it much easier for designers and merchants to install
OpenCollar into their products.

It was OpenCollar's commitment to openness and community that initially
attracted the surge of involvement that the project has seen.  I'm confident
that holding to those values will continue to attract people who want to give
back to the rest of the Second Life community.


